Kira, thank you.
Can you hear me loud and clear? Yeah. Fantastic.
Hey, thank you for this opportunity.
I'd just like to acknowledge you, uh, in the challenge
that you have in front of you, listening to a lot
of people shouting at you at at, at high speed.
So, um, thank you for, for, uh, listening and look.
I'm the Chief Executive of Southland District Council.
Uh, we represent a large rural hazard exposed, uh, district,
approximately 20% of the south island,
and that requires both strong local capability
and effective national support.
Uh, the frequency and intensity
of extreme weather events has increased
exacerbating Southland's exposure to hazards.
We went for nearly 20 years without a state of emergency,
and then five were declared within six years.
Uh, in 2020, we had two flooding events,
2023 and gore.
There was an extensive flooding event.
2024, we had the blue cliffs, uh,
hazard, uh, coastal hazard.
And 2025, uh, there was the widespread, uh,
wind event.
Uh, we do support the core intent of the bill, uh,
being strengthened national leadership, better
iwis partnership, and improved risk reduction
and better recovery and welfare provisions.
However, while we are supportive of the intent,
we are concerned about its practical implementation.
Southern District Council needs a system that works
for small, rural and remote communities,
and the legislation must be practical,
resourced and flexible.
So the key messages that I would like to share with you, uh,
come under a couple of categories.
First is the system leadership and governance.
Uh, we would like to see that the relationships
between central and local government are clarified.
So those governance structures must clearly show
how emergency management committees interact with councils,
especially where funding, staffing,
and policy decisions, uh, intersect.
With respect to the partnership with Iwi Maori, we, um,
we strongly support that, uh, and, and consistent with TER
and South End District Council's existing, uh, relationship
and work with incorporated in ku.
However, the system needs to avoid duplicating structures
or creating confusion about representation.
So we request explicit flexibility,
so partnership structures reflect the local context
and the existing relationships.
We, we also would like
to see national versus regional versus local, uh, clarity
and support, clearer role delineation
and the use of the national lead agencies.
Um, operational overlap remains a concern, especially
how national direction interacts with local autonomy,
autonomy during fast moving events.
I also want to just touch on the chief executive duties,
which is a matter dear to my heart.
Uh, the council chief executive responsibilities
significantly expand under this bill, uh,
requiring the guidance
and creating pressure for small councils
where chief executives may also serve as controllers
or recovery managers.
And we also note that there is uncertainty in the transition
timing with some things being delayed, uh,
their commencement or key provisions being delayed, which,
uh, could well lead
to some uncertainty about when the responsibilities take
effect, the matter of implementation,
uh, the funding, the capability, and the capacity.
And this is one of the issues that, uh, is
of the greatest concern to us.
The new legislative requirements create substantial workload
and resourcing challenges,
and you will be keenly aware
that we are also facing some other challenges in terms
of other legislative demands
and, uh, controls on the amount that councils are allowed
to spend potentially.
So small and rural councils are already under great fiscal
pressure and, uh, risk of unfunded mandates,
uh, such as this one.
Uh, add to that complication, the risk reduction,
the reporting planning
and engagement duties assume at administrative scale,
many councils do not have.
So we request that central government funding
or an adjustment of obligations is made
to match a realistic capacity.
We do strongly support elevating risk reduction,
but risk assessments and resilient planning risks duplicates
work already underway in long-term plans
and spatial planning, climate adaptation, et cetera.
And it overlaps with the planning natural environment
and local government system improvements bills,
and it risks inconsistent expectations.
So we, we, like many others, I suspect in local government,
are requesting an alignment of the definitions of functions
and the processes across all of the related legislation.
The new concept of operational areas may create confusion in
regions like Southland with dispersed communities
and boundaries should generally follow existing structures
unless a strong case exists otherwise.
And we support increased powers for controllers,
but we, uh, urge accountability
to elected members must remain and it must remain clear.
And we would like to echo
Minister Mitchell's recent comments.
Uh, to that effect, shared controllers
and recovery managers must continue to be enabled
for small councils.
The community realities for a district like Southland, uh,
and disproportionately affected communities,
the bill uses a concept without explicitly defining it.
And so we would request a clear definition
that explicitly includes rural communities as well
as seniors, disabled children, culturally
and linguistically deser diverse communities,
and those experiencing socioeconomic deprivation,
the community and volunteer capacity.
Southland, rural Southland relies heavily on volunteers.
The recent event, uh, that we experienced across Southland
and Klu, uh, the, the loss of comms
and, uh, the, the lack
of any avail available electricity or support.
The areas like Tiano, which were incredibly hard hit,
mobilized themselves without communications and
provided support to community members.
But we, we do rely on volunteers.
So the bill needs to simplify
and should simplify response planning requirements
to better rec, recognize volunteering as a,
as is fundamental to resilience.
Um, and we also support inclusion of animal welfare,
but we note the increased engagement
and planning workload for rural districts
with varied livestock types.
So in closing, Southland District Council supports the
intent of the bill and is committed
to strengthening emergency management.
But to succeed, the new system must provide clear,
workable governance, recognize local capacity constraints,
avoid duplication across multiple reforms, and be fairly
and sustainably resourced, uh, and,
and, uh, deal with the inconsistencies
between various bits of legislation.
For example, the chief executive's responsibilities
under the local government act versus the chief executive's
responsibilities under this bill.
At the moment, we operate as many councils do.
We are required to be economic development agencies,
we're required to be infrastructure providers,
and we are required to be regulators.
We're also now being plundered by central government
to fund, uh, uh, the Commerce Commission
and tomato ROI, uh, we would note that
if this bill went in without having, um, suitable funding
to go with it, instead of providing all those services and,
and when required using our staff
to support emergency management,
we would in effect be setting up emergency management
systems that sometimes do infrastructure
and sometimes do community development
and sometimes do regulation. Thank you.
Thank you, Cameron. We've got one, um, question
for you from Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, thanks, Cameron. Good to see you again.
Um, just the, the issue that's been raised about the,
you mentioned widening, CEO responsibility,
and one of the conversations we've already had, uh,
in the submission process is there
isn't actually an opportunity there.
Uh, and that CEOs ultimately have a,
a responsibility in terms of the district planning, uh,
land use planning side of things, as well
as the emergency management side.
And, um, there's a real opportunity potentially, uh,
to be able to align those two,
which currently is being missed.
And, uh, a lot of people have argued
as being missed in this legislation
too, needs to be addressed.
You've got a view on that that you can, you know,
because you, you wear two hats,
you can actually make sure those two things are aligned.
And likewise, likewise, you're elected members.
Look, my, my answer, Andy, and it's great question.
My answer is we're, we are generally happy to try
and do, uh, what we can.
We just need it to be funded.
Uh, so our, our challenge is gonna be
how those inconsistencies are gonna be matched.
Um, if we set the organization up in line with, uh,
delivering the national, you know, in, in line
with this bill and all of the expectations in there, uh, we,
we see some challenges around just how
that would be afforded.
Thanks. Thank you very much for your submission today,
Cameron, and all the very best.
Thank you. Thank you.
We now welcome Rashid,
I think it's Rashid from Gisborne District Council,
Rahi Rahi.
Apologies. Rahi.
There we go, RA, love. Lovely to see you. I'm Rahi Stoltz.
I'm the mayor at the Gisborne District Council,
and I have with me, um, our CEO Nadine Thatcher Swan,
and we have got a presentation of about seven minutes
that we would like to talk to you about, uh,
GIIN District Council as a unitary authority,
meaning we carry the full set of regional
and territorial responsibilities, including all
of emergency management costs.
Rafati covers over 8,000 square kilometers
with 270 kilometers of coastline.
Uh, we are sparsely populated, geographically isolated,
highly exposed to seism seismic tsunami flooding
and CLI climate driven, um, hazards.
And we have the highest proportion of Maori in any
of any region or in alto or as a unit three authority.
We cannot spread emergency management's costs
across multiple councils.
It is just us and increased statutory
responsibilities had a direct
and immediate impact on our rates.
This context underpinned many of our recommendations,
and it is critical when assessing the both practicality.
Um, I have lost count of
how many times I have declared civil defense
emergencies in our region.
So it is very close to our hearts here.
What we want to highlight to you,
our first major concern is alignment across legislation.
Local authorities are required
to manage hazard risk under multiple statuses,
including the C act, the local government act,
the Resource Management Act,
and the forthcoming coming climate and planning reforms.
All are currently being amended, all replaced.
This BO Bill places a strong emphasis on risk reduction,
but does not clearly differentiate risk reduction under
emergency management from risk reduction functions delivered
through planning infrastructure strategies
and managed retreat.
So for a unitary authority, this creates duplication,
inefficiency and extra cost, especially at a time
where more unitary authorities are being encouraged.
We are often required
to undertake multiple parallel hazard assessments using
different methodologies, standards, scopes,
and governments governance arrangements
to satisfy different legislative regimes.
Our submission supports stronger risk reduction,
however, the bill must clearly define
what risk reduction means in this context, ensure it aligns
with planning and infrastructure responsibilities under
other legislation
and require consistent methodologies and standards.
So councils are not forced to duplicate the same work across
multiple legal frameworks.
Without this, the bill risks increasing compliance burden
without improving outcomes, particularly for councils
with li with limited capacity.
Next, I wanna talk about central government support
and implementation.
The bill introduces new responsibilities beyond response,
including risk reduction, readiness and recovery,
but does not provide funding mechanisms for these functions
For unitary authorities,
emergency management costs sit largely in operating
expenditure and flow directly to rate payers
with constrained rating capacity
and proposed rate caps, there is a real risk
that statutory obligations will not be deliverable.
So our, um, submission seeks central government co-funding
for non-response emergency management functions,
particularly hazard data modeling and risk reduction,
and also the implementation support
through excessive accessible standards,
templates and guidance.
We also strongly support that any standards
or rules adopted under the bill must be freely accessible,
not not behind paid subscriptions,
which would shift national system costs onto councils
and communities.
Our fourth point is MANA participation,
structured and accountable.
Ang is an active and living partnership in
MAN plays essential governance, operational,
and community leadership roles in emergency management.
The bill strengthens Maori participation in some areas,
but limits mandated involvement at governance levels
to statutory roles with core coordinating executive groups,
which are not decision-making bodies.
Our submission six one discretion
for emergency management committees to invite MANA
to appointed to appoint representatives.
And two, the ability for MANA
to appoint their own representatives to the kick
or the coordinating executive groups.
For a unitary authority, it is critical
that participation is meaningful, it's structured, continues
and accountable rather than ad hoc.
The bull should enable locally appropriate arrangement
without imposing blanket or unworkable governance models.
My second to last point is localized declarations
for unitary authorities.
The bill intends to enable localized states of emergencies,
but as drafted, this does not work well
for unitary authorities that do not operate
with ward boundaries.
The legislation assumes district
or ward based geographic units,
but in practice, this constraints our ability
to make declarations that are proportionate
and targeted to the actual communities affected.
Our submission recommends explicitly enabling declarations
for defined localities, settlements, or geographic areas.
This is a practical change that would allow the bill
to function as intended across all local authority
structures, including our unitary authorities.
And then last but not least, permanent recovery powers
and national leadership.
Our, our final point, um, addresses recovery.
Our experience in demonstrates
that recovery is no longer an exceptional
or short term phase repeated
and compounding events have created prolonged recovery
environments that sit uncomfortably between response
and business as usual.
Regulation. The current approach relies on ad hoc
event specific legislation.
While effective this introduces delays, uncertainty,
and inconsistencies,
we recommend embedding a standing recovery framework within
the emergency management bill,
and also establishing a permanent national recovery entity,
or clearly designating a single lead agency
with responsibility to recovery, funding, coordination,
policy leadership, and system stewardship.
For unit three authorities managing prolonged recovery
with constrained capacity.
Permanent and predictable recovery arrangements are critical
to delivering timely
and equitable outcomes for our communities.
In closing, the Gman District Council supports the intent
of the bill, but seeks targeted amendments
to ensure it is workable for unit three authorities
and high risk unit, um, regions.
Our recommendations focus on clarity on integration,
affordability, and practical implementation.
We believe these changes will strengthen the emergency
management system and approve outcomes
for communities across Alt New Zealand.
We are happy to answer any questions if
you have any. Thank you.
Thank you, Sue, you both? Yes. Tim has a question.
Andy did have one over. Tim,
Thank you. Um,
I just ask about the council,
I apologize I don't have the coverage for my camera
to be on, but, um, a number
of councils have talked about sort of conflicting things
between a, a, a local or district response
and a regional response.
Do, do you see it as an advantage to be a unitary council?
Does that give you clarity that you, just speaking clarity,
does that give the clarity of, uh, I guess we'd call it unit
of command or just one, one agency,
one controller for the entire region?
Um, I, I'll respond to that. Thank you for your question.
Yes, absolutely. We do see it as an advantage for, uh,
our region in that you've got, yeah, really one clear,
um, line of sight for that accountability, uh, also
for the community in terms of their continuity
and understanding, you know, who's,
who's running the show pretty much.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks, Tim.
Andy, did you have a question?
Oh, I'll, I'll ask, I'll ask one. I I had my hand up.
I hadn't taken it down. Um, thanks, Rohit.
Um, just the one question you, um,
had about localized declarations, is this something
that's in the bill itself,
which is different to what's there at the moment?
Because, uh, uh, the only declaration I ever got
to make not quite as busy as you were in terms
of emergencies, um, is, uh,
it wa was a very small part of our South coast,
so it's not, wasn't a ward at all.
Um, it was just particular, uh, a number of streets
that faced the South coast,
so we weren't prevented from doing that.
Are you saying there's something in the legislation which
prevents you, um, doing it by anything that o other than
by ward or by the district as a whole?
Yeah, so that, so if I respond to that, so
with our area just recently that was impacted was the top
of the East Cape, which is bay.
Um, so the legislation required, um,
so we were talking about can we just declare, uh, for
that particular area as a, as a unitary region, uh,
but the legislation only allows it to be a district or, um,
or a ward within that area.
So it's just really around the nuancing
and that enable us to declare just for that specific area.
That's clear. Thanks. Thank you
to you both for your submission.
Have a good day. No
Worries. Thank you.
Bye. Thank you. Welcome, Sue.
We now have Orion New Zealand Limited,
and we welcome Vivian for your 10 minute submission.
Welcome, Vivian.
Uh, good afternoon. Thank you very much
for this opportunity to, to appear before the committee
and speak to our submission on the bill.
My name's Vivian Wilson,
and I am the policy lead at Orion New Zealand Limited.
So just a little bit of information about Orion.
Orion is the third largest
electricity distribution business in New Zealand.
Our network extends from banks peninsula
to Arthur's Pass from the M River to the river.
We have over 229,000 customer connections,
over 14,300 kilometers of lines and cables,
and over 90,000 power poles.
And we currently have an important role under the Civil
Defense Emergency Management Act as a lifeline utility.
So we acknowledge that our community is increasingly
dependent on our electricity distribution service.
So it's essential we identify and manage our key risks.
Our community especially depends on electricity during and
after high impact, low prop probability events such
as major earthquakes or floods.
Orion is currently preparing an application
to the Commerce Commission for a customized price path,
and this is to make sure that we have the revenue needed
to provide a safe, reliable, resilient,
and future ready network for our customers.
And we will make our application in June this year.
And a key component of our customized price path application
will be investing more to strengthen the Orion network
so it can better withstand severe weather
and natural disasters.
And our customers have told us that keeping power safe,
reliable, and resilient is what matters most,
while also keeping costs as low as possible.
So Orion supports the new emergency management bill,
and we very much appreciate the changes
that have been made when comparing, comparing this bill
with the 2023 bill.
So I just wanted to highlight a few
points of our submission.
Uh, we are concerned about the widening of the duty
of an essential infrastructure provider in clause 74 a,
whereas the current position is
that every lifeline utility must ensure that it is able
to function to the fullest possible extent,
even though this may be at a reduced level during and
after an emergency.
The new duty is that we will need to ensure
that our infrastructure is able to function
to the fullest possible extent, et cetera.
So it seems to us that this will be of a higher standard
or a wider standard,
and it may be significantly harder to meet that,
given the definition of infrastructure components,
which make up the definition of essential infrastructure.
So infrastructure components means assets,
information networks, systems, suppliers,
people and processes.
So it is quite broad
and we ask that the select committee, um, consider reverting
to the previous formulation in section 60 of the
C-D-E-M-A.
Um, in terms of sector response plans,
Orion supports the development of sector response plans,
but we reinforce the submission made
by electricity networks RTRR, that the bill should be amend
to provide that the director general must not require the
development of a sector response plan during a state
of emergency or a transition period.
And we've also raised some concerns about
how a sector response plan may address default information
sharing for the essential infrastructure providers.
And that's in clause 1 0 5 B of the bill.
We agree that information sharing is very important,
but it can present some legal difficulties
where some information is subject, subject
to contractual provisions, privacy,
and other considerations.
And we also need to be assured
that Orion's information will be treated
with the necessary protections.
Another provision we would like
to see clarified is clause 130 of the bill.
Clause one 30 sets out various powers to close roads
and public places during an emergency.
We support this clause,
but we would like to see clear provision
for allowing certain persons
or groups of persons into restricted areas.
We need to be able to get our authorized staff
and contractors to our network quickly
to affect repairs while also maintaining safety.
And we think the bill would benefit from this clarification.
And we have some suggested wording here.
We have made some comments on the compliance provisions in
the bill as an EDB, we are subject
to regimes under the Commerce Act
and the Electricity Industry Act,
and we are concerned about the complexities
of another compliance regime and additional costs.
However, we do think that if a compliance regime is added,
the functions of the director general
of emergency management should also be brought in to include
a capability, capability building function for persons
who have responsibilities under the act,
and that would match the similar regime under the
Water Services Act.
Finally, we've made some comments in relation
to the new rulemaking power for reporting requirements.
We support the consultation process
before the minister makes rules,
and we think the provisions relating
to reporting could be clarified to make it expressed
that rules do not impose new reporting requirements on
parties other than those already
specifically referenced in the act.
And they would be the Emergency Management Committees,
the National Controller regional controllers,
the National Recovery Manager,
and Regional Recovery Managers.
So just to summarize, we very much support the bill,
but three key takeaways from us would be
to reconsider the change to the duty
of essential infrastructure providers
to provide more clarity around sector response plans
and include clear provision for allowing certain persons
or groups of persons into restricted areas.
Thank you.
Thank you, Vivian. Uh, any questions?
I have Tim, Timmy, can you hear us?
Oh, I can. And sorry, I did mean to take my hand down,
but I'm very interested in the, um, the definition
and, uh, of the essential infrastructure,
and we were saying infrastructure that needs to have
that continuity.
Um, can you give us a tangible example of
what would be brought in by this act
that you would be responsible for
that wasn't previously under the old definition?
I think it would be suppliers.
So the definition is quite broad now,
because we would actually have to make sure somehow
that suppliers could also function
to provide that infrastructure.
So we're just, we're trying to work through that to see how
that would apply,
but we, we do have concerns that it, that is quite broad.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks, Jim. Andy?
Yeah, thanks. Uh, ViiV. Nice to see you. Nice to you too.
Yeah, look, I just, one question on that, the whole issue of
how resilient the infrastructure and the systems are
and how transparent, um, that is, uh, to, uh,
to consumers and users.
Um, you, you've mentioned the role of ComCom there
and, um, obviously asking for, uh, presumably,
presumably the ability to be able
to invest more in resilience,
but how transparent is that process, um, in terms of the,
your asset management and your,
and your practices, um, so that customers can look at it
and go, yeah, we can, we can see what you're doing,
we can see why costs are going up
because you're investing in, um, um, reliability and, uh,
and resilience, et cetera.
Yep. So the asset management plan that we are required
to do under the Commerce Commission requirements,
that has quite, um, detailed requirements about
what asset management we do need to disclose
and be transparent about, and our resilient
and our preparations for resilient infrastructure.
So that is quite substantial.
Um, also at Orion, we're currently
introducing a new integrated asset management system,
and that's going to really improve things for us.
So we'll be able to see where all our assets are,
the state of the assets,
and it, it integrates with the whole
of our systems here at Orion.
And that's coming into force gradually over the next year.
And so
To, to just to follow that up, does
that mean at the moment you're not fully across, uh,
the state of your assets?
We do, we are fully across the state of our assets,
but we we're just using different systems
and what we are trying to do is bring it in under one
system, which will make it a lot easier, I think.
Okay. No thanks. Thank you, Vivian.
Thank you for your submission today. All the very best.
Thank you. We now welcome
Grant Maxwell from Stantec.
Welcome, grant
over to you for your 10 minutes submission.
Got off. Um, thank you for having me.
Uh, today, grant Maxwell, um, I'm from Stantec.
Um, we're a large multi, uh, discipline engineering
and consulting business, um,
with many offices across the country.
Um, we've been involved with lots of different pieces of,
uh, I guess emergency management over the many years
and personally, um, sort
of 20 odd years playing in response, uh,
and preparedness and recovery programs.
So, uh, really keen and thank you very much for your time.
Um, overall, we're really in support of the intent
of the emergency management bill revision, um,
and its response to lessons from recent
multi-regional events.
Um, we have seen a consistent feature in,
in the recent emergencies being very ad hoc engagement of
what is the private sector, particularly professional
and technical advisors.
Uh, in the absence of clear legislative frameworks.
This creates a two system risks, uh, hesitation
with critical advice being delayed
because people are unsure how whether to engage
and also disaster privateering, uh, rogue
and unstructured land grabbing of various inputs
through the process, um,
that our sector is largely not proud of.
Uh, this is usually the wrong person at the
wrong place at the wrong time.
Neither of these outcomes serve our communities well,
and they're both systems of a system that relies on goodwill
and improvisation rather than preparedness by design.
Uh, today I want to talk through three practical parts
of our, um, submission, um,
that is reducing ad hoc engagement for our industry,
improving preparedness, uh,
and enabling the system to confidently draw on capability
that it already has, especially within the first 72
hours of a disaster.
Uh, point number one is the explicit recognition
of professional and technical advisors
as essential partners.
The bill doesn't explicitly recognize professional
and technical advisors.
Despite the critical role we play across all
phases of emergency management.
In practice, these advisors are engaged immediately in
emergencies, often before formal declarations
or written delegations are in place, um,
and are central to life safety decisions.
Uh, asset access and infrastructure continuity.
The lack of recognition leads to ad hoc engagement
and rather inconsistent integration into the Sims system
with uneven outcomes between regions, uh, differing access
to specialist capability, uh,
particularly in environments where they're cut off.
Um, work is already underway, um, in this space.
Um, Stantec has been involved
with Nelson Tasman emergency management, uh,
leading in NEMA resilience funded, uh, project
to integrate professional services into
the emergency response.
This approach aligns
with this existing sims escalation levels and SIM systems.
Uh, it preserves business as usual arrangements, uh,
and introduces the structure coordination when the resource
limits are exceeded.
It has broad agreement across c DM groups, uh,
that this model should be implemented more widely
to address a more coordinated, uh, series of issues
that continue to exist in our system.
We've developed a national working group through ACE nz, uh,
to collect and collaborate the industry.
This group includes mb uh, engineering New Zealand,
and a selection of large consulting firms.
Um, and I guess my message, uh, across this is, uh, as much
as what's in the, uh, submission is
that the capability in the system already exists.
Uh, the sector is desperately looking for clarity, um,
and explicit, explicit recognition in the bill
with lock in good practice already being developed
and improved preparedness nationwide.
Uh, number two is providing protection
for those technical advisors.
Acting in good faith recognition alone is insufficient if
the advisors are not protected when engaged early, um,
the bill expands liability protections well,
but these are largely contingent on formal delegation,
written declaration directions
and declared emergencies in relevance.
Technical advice is often sought
before these thresholds are met.
Uh, and this advice is given in the field, uh,
with incomplete information available
and under time pressure with very adverse conditions
for businesses and professional service providers.
This creates legal hesitation, delayed engagement,
slower decision making at critical moments.
This is not about reducing our accountability.
It's about providing, uh,
and protecting good faith technical judgment, uh, given
to protect life safety and essential services.
The message I have is
that the system expects early expert input.
Um, it must identify
and manage that, uh, the legal hesitation that suppresses
that, and that recognition without protection undermines our
ability to be well prepared.
Uh, third point, uh, is around the expectations
of the bill creating, uh,
that will create a funding and capability gap.
The bill appropriately raises expectations around planning
and preparedness, coordination, consistency,
digital enablement, and infrastructure resilience.
However, the new statutory expectations without funding does
create us risk for the future.
Those key issues are around capability and resourcing.
Um, uneven across regions, smaller
or rural regions struggling to meet higher standards, uh,
and the preparedness activities are often discretionary
without dedicated funding, um, made available for them.
Funding uncertainty does lead to slower decision making, uh,
in our experience, hesitation
to engage professional services early.
Uh, increased reliance on reactive procurement, uh,
which reinforces this disaster privateering.
And it oftentimes, uh, a bill at the end
that nobody wants to pay for.
Preparedness costs money up front,
but it is far cheaper than recovery.
Uh, does, does it delivers faster, more confident response
and transition decisions.
And the message is if government wants to take a step change
and outcomes, expectations must be matched with funding
and implementation support in conclusion, um,
they all lead to the same outcome.
Better preparedness, uh, recognizing technical advisors,
protecting early advice
and funding expectations will reduce a hoc engagement,
avoids disaster privat hearing in our sector, uh,
and enables better decisions that are made earlier.
And with confidence preparedness is
where the bill can deliver its greatest return,
not just in response, but
for communities in the weeks and months and years.
That follow. That was quite rush, wasn't it? Thank you.
Uh, hopefully, uh, any questions? Welcome to them.
Oh, thanks Grant. Really, um, helpful to listen
to your submission today.
Andy, question, then I can hand back to Tim.
Yeah, look, um, thank you very
much, grant, really appreciate that.
Um, just talking about that, um, issue of, uh, ad hoc, um,
involvement, I, is this something that you, you are wanting
a collection of professional, uh, um, advisors being, um,
recognized explicitly in the bill in terms
of maybe a, a schedule?
Um, what is it that you actually,
have you got some specific words, uh,
that you're wanting to put into the bill?
No, I haven't address This because I'm conscious.
Yeah, sorry. I I was gonna say, I'm conscious
that there are gonna be a lot
of possible professional organizations and,
and how do we capture who's in that and who's not in that?
And you talked about the, what do you call
it, disaster privateering.
So you don't wanna get it wrong and put the wrong people in
there, but you wanna get it right and
put the right people in there.
Yeah. Uh, good question. Uh, Andy, thank you for that.
Um, look, the, the system knows, I think,
I don't think we need to be as explicit as people in names.
I think, you know, we're talking about organizations,
so iwi well, um, represented
and being brought into decision making, um,
likewise professional services, um, in that shape
and form that I guess it's dependent also in the
region and what they need.
Um, the, the project that we've been developing
with Nelson Tasman Emergency Management is exactly the
detail behind implementing what that would look like.
So, um, uh, NEMA have funded that, uh, original project, um,
and CDM uh, groups around the country have shown, um,
largely, um, engagement to be able to look,
to implement and set that up.
So I think the devil would, the, the detail would come, um,
through that implementation plan,
which would be probably in a bit more detail within civil
defense and what would be sims as well.
So do we effectively say that if we require councils to,
to do this, they can work out for themselves
who the organizations are they contract with, um,
in their particular areas.
But there is an expectation if,
if there's an expectation in the bill, I will do that.
Um, because at the moment what I'm hearing is that, um, some
of the professional services organizations who want to help,
who get asked to help are left out in the cold in terms
of the planning and the, and the response as well.
Is that accurate? That's
Fair. Yeah. So I'd include
from,
from councils also all asset owners.
So that would be lifeline groups.
Um, anyone who has an asset that, that would be
or could be damaged during an event will,
will want an appropriate level of, um, assessment and, and,
and planning about what they would do about that.
Lots of that has happens internally within organizations,
but where professional services are needed, it's
that engagement that becomes very ad hoc, um,
particularly when, um,
everyone starts relying on a single organization,
which clearly capacity issues would,
would prevent them from doing everything
at the right, at the same time. Yeah,
Look, if, if there are some words, um,
that you can suggest to us,
that will be very much a help, uh, a help.
Cool. Thank you. Thank you very much
for your submission today, grant.
Thank you everyone. Kiaa Kia. Thank you, Tim.
Um, Kira LA and Lydia, thank you so much for that.
Um, and I believe we have Jean from KRA dog scoop,
so I'm just, um, oh, I can see,
uh, can see Gene on there.
You can just unmute and turn on your camera.
And, uh, while you're doing that, we've got sort
of another eight or nine minutes for this submission.
So, um, you might like to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute or two to run.
Um, but until then,
and nice to see your, uh, dog with you. The time is yours.
Hello. Thank you so much for letting me join today.
Um, I don't even know how I've landed here today.
Uh, I started a small business in last end of last year,
and in that process, I have discovered many things
that I was quite shocked about.
And also the perspective of the general public
and the people that I serve
and the people that I wanna protect.
Um, things that I discovered is that at the moment,
animals are considered property that opens up a huge window
for, for animals to be put into a consumerism space
where people neglect animals, people treat animals as,
uh, expendable.
Uh, and the, the words that
that up upset me the most was destroyed, saying
that animals can be destroyed.
That is life. So the things
that we are talking about here in the emergency bill,
I don't even know how I found myself here,
but this is where I am right now.
And things that I've heard are things that I think I agree
with, with, uh, human preservation.
That's why we are bringing you here.
We are talking about better overall systems.
That's what everyone's asking for.
We want, or in terms of animals, we want the animals
to be not considered as property at the moment in law,
in a government, we have, uh, personhood
or property, animals and plants don't land in any category.
We have plants in, uh, Wang, Nui River in the environment.
Wri River has been granted its own personal entity.
Um, so it's, it's like in a weird space
where it's not personhood
and it's not property animals, uh,
there has been some very high profile, uh, cases of animals,
uh, of elephants and chips being represented in court.
People trying to get them personhood
because they aren't, uh, considered property.
I don't quite agree with personhood.
I think that's people need to stay in people
and property needs to stay in property.
I think we need a, we're in a space right now
where we can create a new avenue, a new space for that.
And I suggest something like a life hierarchy
where we have personhood, people at the top,
we have animals, animal hood, we have plants, environment,
eco, and then things, property,
which is non-living, and we've got living.
We need to ask ourselves what is life? Life is to me.
And what I've seen through my life has been an acronym,
learning information from experiences.
We need to figure out what
we've learned from our experiences.
The last time these bills were set was ages ago.
Like it's yonks. We've learned way too much in
science and all these kind of things.
We need to bring it together. Already.
We have animals rights act, which agrees
and recognize as the animals are sentient beings, we need
to recognize that in law as well,
because it's catching up people, good people that,
and it's, it's eliminating bad people.
Bad people aren't, taxpayers are having to pay for that
because it's landing in a legal space.
I have spoken to many people that have breeders, um,
dog walkers, all sorts of different scenarios where
like, there's a vet that I spoke to,
there's a holiday cat, she gets a straw
because there's a, a client that she has
that brings a cat in once a year to get euthanized
when they go on holiday and then they get a new cat.
That is a consumer mind.
I recommend we change animal hood
and then make it, uh, a guardianship
and a stewardship guardianship for companions for people
with companion animals
and stewardship for people with farming.
Those kind of things would change the mindset.
And I reckon right now we're in a bit of an emergency
regarding animals regarding the fatalities.
Just happened recently, that sort of situation.
Government legal should have had more right
and more authority to step in to change things.
Can you hear me?
Yes. Yeah. Awesome.
I can, I dunno, my, my screen looks to be frozen.
But yes, I think we need to protect animals
because that protects people.
It protects people like I've heard in the, um,
bill submissions today.
Uh, dis uh, disability.
Um, it also helps like we have avalanche dogs.
Dogs literally save lives.
We don't know enough about animals to class them as property
and classing them as property is an old Roman thing.
Like it's just, it's old school.
So we need to change the responsibility.
I recommend we introduce better systems.
Some of those could be licensing, uh, creating licensing
for dogs, people who get a license licenser
and who are um,
who are responsible guardians.
They will get licenses
and they will be willing to, that will fund, uh, other dogs.
We could also create, um, standard operational practices
where all the councils
and regulations have the same set rules regarding, uh,
seven days and 14 days to rehome
or destroy animals.
People living in farms and rural communities.
We don't have reception.
We have large spaces where we can't 14 days
and seven days is not enough.
Even the government with this exact bill have recognized
that it takes people longer to get paperwork together
than it does apparently for us to find our animals
who have a mind of their own.
They wonder, they do things.
It's hard for us to find something
that has a mind of its own.
Um, and
then my final questions would be why are we,
why are we doing this?
Like why are we doing this?
We are doing this for human preservation.
What does that look like? What does life look like?
How could this impact future generations?
What we are doing right now, the who is us?
The people who care, who speak up and say something.
And it's yourselves who have the position
to do something right now.
You're in that position,
the when is right now for the future.
And then again, the what is, what is life. And thank you.
I will take some questions. If anyone
Thank you. Appreciate
your, um, your time.
I'm just seeing if any of the, um, other mps have questions.
It doesn't look like they do
and we are pretty much out of time.
But really appreciate you, um,
Jean taking the time to chat to us today.
I think you've made it really clear
and particularly your, your hierarchy of the sort of the,
the, the person's animals, eco hood.
I thought you um, that was really
helpful to put it in those terms.
So thank you for taking the time.
Um, and with that, we are gonna move on
to New Zealand Airports Association
and I can see that we have billion, Steve.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you Jane.
Um, so we'll move on to that one, uh, 10 minutes
for New Zealand airports
and I'll let you know when there's one or two to go,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
Uh, it's all yours.
Thank you. Good afternoon.
Um, really great to be here this afternoon.
We'll keep it pretty, uh, brief so
that we've got time for a bit of a chat.
Uh, my name's Billy Moore. I'm the CEO of NZ Airports.
I'm joined by Steve Ryden, our policy director from our team
of three here in Wellington.
Uh, we represent 49 airports around the country,
including the 21 that are currently designated
as Lifeline Utilities under the Civil Defense
Emergency Management Act.
So this is a big area of focus for us, both in terms of
how we engage with government on policy and legislation,
but also in our day-to-day work when there is a emergency,
um, working with the airports
and making sure they're getting what they need
and also ensuring that the learnings from each
event are shared around the network.
'cause they are invaluable, uh, for all of us.
Um, so we are a network of, uh, critical infrastructure, um,
covering as you know, uh, passenger movement, freight,
medical evacuations, and community response and recovery.
And I think probably the thing
that's been particularly striking
for airports over the past few years is it's not just about
transport inevitably,
but inevitably they become locations
where people gather in an emergency.
So, um, the amount of people who simply come to the airport
to hang out, to stay for shelter
and for wifi, things like that, um, that that kind of role
of an airport as a community location is just increasing in,
um, so much these days in these events.
We'll take the submission as read, uh,
pretty simple, uh, feedback.
I think we generally support the direction of tra travel.
The key point I'd highlight, I think
for your work on this bill is, um,
the proportionate regulation kind of point around
when we have critical infrastructure
that is at a regional level, these can be very small teams
and very small operations.
So how do we make sure the requirements work for both a,
a big, um, organization, um, national organizations through
to these small local locations and then civil aviation rules
and their, um, relationship with the system.
So when we, um, when we look at civil aviation rules,
they already do require airports
to be operational in emergencies
and include a lot of detail in order
to make sure that's the case.
So we are not really looking for another layer of regulation
that adds more compliance to airports.
I think it's more about banking the performance
that civil aviation rules already, um, get from the system,
um, because the airports are already likely to surpass any
of the requirements that, um, might be imposed by this bill
and the, and the processes that might follow.
Uh, so that's really where our perspective is coming from
and we're very pleased to get into discussion with you.
Thank you. Appreciate you, um, taking the time to chat.
There's a few questions around the team.
Can I just ask, we've had a few essential infrastructure
providers, uh, speak to us on different aspects.
Um, I'm aware that not every airport in New Zealand is
covered under this and not every airport
that would normally have commercial or,
or all also sort of lifeline, um, services
provided is currently listed.
And there's been some suggestions
that we could update that list. Do you have a view on that?
Yeah, we, we do.
Um, in the previous iterations of this bill,
it has been something that's come up for us,
whether it would be noted
as a category rather than specific locations.
Uh, there are airports that would put their hand up
to be considered a lifeline utility.
So that's a piece of work
that probably still needs to be done.
And I think what's been, uh, interesting in this process,
if it is deferred to a regulation, um,
that does mean it's going to, that process might be done,
um, outside the parliamentary process.
So, uh, we do think that more should be on there.
Um, it's just naturally going to be the case that more,
more would play a role in a
disaster wherever it may be around the country.
But Steve, you've been a bit closer to, uh, some
of the individual feedback on that around the country.
Have you got any thoughts?
Oh yeah, there are at least three airports that would,
I think like to stick their hand up
and become, get that, that status and take on that role.
Um, if you look at the schedule of, uh,
lifeline utility airports at the moment,
um, it's pretty crude.
It's done region by region.
If there's only one airport in the region, that makes sense,
but if there's two or three, those others miss out
and it was at the ma the majority,
or sorry, the the largest airport at the time.
So there needs to be a more flexible system for entities
to join that list of essential, uh,
infrastructure providers.
And we were a bit disappointed.
Sorry, can you just give us what, just as examples,
what would those three be that you were thinking of?
Well, I don't wanna drop them in,
but um, I know that TPO would like to become one, uh,
whereas it's there, there's a Alpo, it's got its own issues,
but Rotorua is the regional, uh,
lifeline utility at the moment.
Um, there are others
and they are well separated from
the regional lifeline utility
by major mountains, for example.
And they would like to say that they are a lifeline utility
and take on those roles because they would be supporting a
community more actively
and it's a very useful status for airports
to have as
Well. So that could be like a
master center
or a cup of tea supporting Wellington if the big one hit,
Uh, yeah, that would be a a a good example.
Yeah. Um, there are others.
I'm, I'm going to be a bit cagey
because they've said it to us.
They may not have said it. Sure.
Uh, no, no, that's fine. It's just
helpful to understand those in general.
Yeah, yeah. So like this, so,
so you could look at something like the, um,
a F eight on the west coast where you have one airport, uh,
that is currently a life on utility, whereas, you know,
that's Hoka, whereas Westport f France, Joseph has
tiny little ES strip,
but you kind of need the flexibility to say in the big one,
what's the best response
and how do you then tear those responsibilities to the size
of their operation?
Because we look at things like I say, Auckland
or Christchurch or Wellington or,
and they are very big, they've got, um, great management
and they've got the capital to cope with big demands.
Might, um, build on that
'cause it is, it is almost a,
it's a very tricky question to answer.
Uh, one of the concepts we've often raised is this concept
of a minimum operating network.
New Zealand doesn't really know
what its minimum operating network of aviation needs to be.
And it is something that's being picked up through, um,
various reviews and papers over time.
But that might be something that the committee might wish
to comment on, that continuing work on
that concept would then inform this process as well
and have a better understanding from DPMC
and the other agencies of where they need
that e strip capability under different scenarios.
That works never really been done in the detail
that we think, um, would be good for New Zealand
And, and these days with PBN
and instead of ground based navigation,
that must make more airports accessible
even if there's a
significant disruption on the ground, right?
Yeah. And, and that's one
of the big things about airports in
those emergency management.
We don't have that, that
that ground defamation from flooding
or an earthquake doesn't hinder the airport being that,
that transport hub that can get people out
and rescuers in, for example. So
I I thank you.
That's really helpful. I do wanna let Andy Foster just get
his question in for the last minute.
Oh, you're on mute, Andy.
Stop doing that. Um, I'll just say thank you very much.
Good to see you again. Um, question I've got just in terms
of that, that, um, tiered approach with different, um, uh,
different airports isn't really the issue going to be.
What is the likely need, uh, the likely function
that any given airfield is likely to, to, um, to need
to perform in the, in the event of a major, um, earthquake
and, and or, or a major event?
And I certainly, I mean the first one I thought of was, um,
Hoka slash westport slash you know, Franz, et cetera, um,
where they may almost certainly likely
to be cut off from each other.
So isn't that the key is what is the function going
to be in the event of a foreseeable emergency?
Yeah, um, I may, the the issue is we don't want regulation
that imposes, uh, burdens that just can't be met by
that airport's resources.
Uh, and the thing is, you would, you would want
to have the tiers and the planning
to be done against realistic scenarios for that airport.
And if you have an airport that's nearby
or really good land access, they don't have to be quite
as ready to swing into the full action.
You still want 'em ready to go,
but they, there's gonna be alternatives for that,
that region because it's a all about the people in the
region, not the airport, if you know what I mean,
the airport safe to serve the people. Yeah.
And I think Steve, the, the other kind of element to it,
and you're quite right to point this out, um, is
the complimentary roles of course.
So say something happens, Hoka ticket needs
to be operational, and then
of course Westport's gonna have a flow
and effect from that, uh, with general aviation support
or pre-positioning from NZDF
to the extent possible, things like that.
So it's always gonna have to be a multiple approach.
You saw that, um, uh, with, uh, with, uh, Hawke's Bay
for instance with the amount of traffic,
and I think we've highlighted a little bit in the
submission, the amount of traffic that has
to be managed is always gonna have a broader impact as well.
But I think the key thing I'd take away from your question
is this stuff can be workshopped and it's time.
Let's use this process as that platform within government
to really get good at it because we, we can, and we,
and it would be great to see agencies pick up their baton.
No, thank you. Thank you very much for your time.
We have run out now, but
that was a really helpful submission.
We appreciate the clarity you brought. So anytime.
Thank you. Thank you. We are gonna move on
to Danette now from, um, the Animal Justice Party.
I believe she's online. There it is.
So you can turn on your camera and unmute.
Um, and, uh, the time is yours.
I'll let you know when there's a minute or two to run, uh,
but you might like to leave some time
for questions over to you.
Thank you Tina Chair and members of the committee.
My name is Dan Whitter
and I'm speaking on behalf
of the Animal Justice Party Artero in New Zealand.
So the Animal Justice Party is a registered political party
dedicated to advocating for the rights, welfare
and protection of animals.
So when disaster strikes,
animal should definitely not be an afterthought.
They are in damaged homes, they are tied up,
they're locked in backyards,
they're in paddocks with no way out.
They are wildlife fleeing,
and people are forced into really impossible choices.
So during Hurricane Katrina, which devastated Louisiana
and Mississippi in 2005,
companion animals were not permitted on evacuation transport
or in emergency shelters.
As a result, thousands of people refused to evacuate,
placing themselves and first responders at very high risk.
At the same time, those who did evacuate were forced
to leave their companion animals behind.
And an estimated 250,000 animals were abandoned
and fewer than 5% were ever re were, um,
were ever reunited with their families.
So this was not an unavoidable tragedy,
it was a planning failure,
and it led to the passage of the Pets Evacuation
and Transportation Standards Act.
The reform that followed, uh,
followed a catastrophic failure
and we can legislate proactively.
Instead. New Zealand now has the opportunity
to avoid repeating that mistake,
and we don't need to look overseas to see the gaps.
So when Cyclone Gabrielle hit the Hawke's Bay, uh, a dog,
it was, a dog was tied up, tangled, uh, to all these pieces
of wood, which turned out actually to be his kennel.
Uh, and with the raising waters, he was pushed up
to the roof with all of this wood tangled up,
and he was stranded on that rooftop.
Now, luckily, he was able to be saved.
However, the rescue team were quoted
as saying there were deceased animals
of every description everywhere, domestic
and farmed animals.
It was heartbreaking. Those houses,
people's lives were gone, their animals were gone.
And they also said
that it took a huge toll on the rescue team.
Climate related disasters are increasing in both
frequency and severity.
New Zealand has experienced repeated extreme weather events
in recent years, floods, cyclones, wildfires, consistent
with the documented impacts of human driven climate change.
These disasters have devastating
consequences for communities.
And when planning does not include animals, they suffer
and they die in large numbers.
We contribute to the drivers of these events.
We therefore have responsibility to plan for all
of those that are affected.
So I'll just summarize a couple of key points.
Animals are treated as property in this bill, as you know.
So New Zealand recognizes animal sentance Under the Animal
Welfare Act of 1999, animals are legally recognized
as capable of feeling fear, pain, and distress.
Yet this bill, emergency powers refer only
to human life and property.
So human life needs to be changed simply just to life.
If sentient applies in ordinary law,
it must also apply in emergencies.
There is no formal plan after animals are rescued.
So we need a 30 day holding period microchip, scanning,
vet sign off, euthanasia where possible.
And a reunification system
as disaster really does separate families.
Red tape can delay rescues.
So requiring guardian contact
before entry puts animals at risk.
For example, when water is rising, seconds really do matter.
Assistant animals are ignored.
So disabled people should not need to choose between safety
and their assistant dog.
Evacuation compliance depends on inclusion,
and we have no agency responsibility for animal rescue.
So no clear roles for different animals.
This causes confusion and reliance on volunteers.
The bill does not designate who is responsible
for companion animals, farmed animals, native wildlife,
and the ones who are always forgotten, but also suffer
and feel pain as our non-native and urban wildlife.
And I'll just shout out to hoo-ha for their exceptional mahi
and leading in this space,
farmed animals are unprotected in planning.
So farmers want to protect their animals,
but they lack authority and, uh, support
and the animal welfare act can also be overridden.
So welfare standards must stay enforceable In emergency
powers, crisis is when animals
are actually the most vulnerable.
There is no national consistency or learning framework.
So care depends on region.
We need national standards, animal specific
after action reporting, evidence-based planning,
clear funding pathways.
And without this, the same failures will repeat.
Around 63%
of New Zealand households have a companion animal,
and there is a combined total
of approximately 60 million farmed animals.
And of course, the countless wild animals,
if this bill passes without amendment, animals will continue
to suffer and die unnecessarily In disasters,
this impacts animals, obviously, uh,
but also people, families, communities, and the economy.
These adjustments are practical.
They are aligned with existing law.
They strengthen, not win in emergency man management.
And finally, uh, these gaps do highlight the need
for a clearer statutory oversight
for animal welfare at a national level,
which is why we do push for an independent commissioner
for animals and we urge the committee
to adopt at the very least tier one amendments
as the essential safeguards,
and we're obviously available
to support as needed with this.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, Danette, that was really, um,
well articulated
and I'm just looking around the room
to see if there were any other questions,
which there don't seem to be.
I think you've set that out really clearly for us.
Um, and obviously a big year for you guys
with the election stuff, so, um, yeah, look forward
to seeing you out and about really soon,
but thanks for your time today.
Fantastic. Thank you so much.
No problem. With that, we're gonna move
to Sean Fullon from the Insurance Council.
Uh, and, uh, believe he's, oh, yep, I can see.
So if you turn on your camera and unmute,
we're gonna give you the last 10 minutes of this session
before we take a short break.
And, uh, I'll let you know when there's a minute
or two to run for questions.
But, um, uh, sorry for for time,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
Otherwise, it's all yours, Sean.
Thank you and good afternoon. My name is Sean Foland.
I'm the Disaster response
and recovery leader for the
Insurance Council of New Zealand.
In my role, I work closely
with insurance industry stakeholders,
including the emergency management sector,
to support insurers responding
to significant disaster events on behalf
of the insurance council and our members, thanks
for the opportunity today
to make an oral submission to the committee.
Um, my comments will focus on two main components
of our submission on the bill.
First. Insurers
and insurance products play a critical role in the response
to and the recovery from disasters.
And for this reason, the insurance industry is a key partner
in the readiness for future recoveries.
And as insurance fundamentally is about the acceptance,
pricing, and pooling of risk.
Insurers advocate strongly for risk reduction,
ICNZ and our members are
therefore vital participants in A four R approach
to emergency management.
The insurance sector supports the government's efforts
to strengthen New Zealand's emergency management system.
We especially welcome the principle of a whole
of society approach to emergency management introduced in
the government's response to the inquiry, into the response
to the North Island weather events.
While the bill makes improvements
and moves the system toward a whole of society involvement,
we believe there are opportunities
to include additional partners in the private sector,
including insurers.
Um, some of this work is already underway
as the Insurance council have partnered with NEMA
and the Natural Hazards Commission at the national level
to work together on pre-disaster recovery planning.
However, given the decentralized structure
of emergency management roles
and responsibilities, more work is needed
at the regional and local level.
The bill presents an opportunity to create pathways
to better integrate insurers into planning
and develop arrangements to foster increased certainty and
therefore efficiency in both response and recovery.
Our submission details suggested amendments
to specific clauses to achieve this,
and I won't go into detail on all of those here.
However, I would like to highlight two potential outcomes
of collaboration and engagement with insurers
of particular importance to the insurance sector are
pre-agreed arrangements to enable information sharing
between emergency management and the insurance sector,
and developing a means such as accreditation
to support insurers, access to affected areas,
including properties following certain types of events.
Moving onto a second component
of the industry's feedback on the bill.
We urge the government to integrate emergency management
reform with other legislative reforms
that are proceeding throughout the system.
Um, we all know that New Zealand is a risky country exposed
to a wide range of natural hazards,
and we expect climate change will continue
to increase risks in the decades to come.
As I alluded to earlier, insurance is about pricing
and accepting the transfer of risk and increasing risk,
therefore may mean increasing pressure on the accessibility
of insurance products.
Insurers are committed
to keeping iur insurance products accessible
to all New Zealanders, but this must be done sustainably.
Prudent and proactive management
of natural hazard risk can positively influence insurance
accessibility, supporting the economy
and ultimately New Zealand's prosperity.
Now and in the long term future.
We therefore encourage the government
to consider the bill in the wider context of other reforms,
especially RMA reform in the planning
and national environment bills
and the national adaptation framework,
and to coordinate all legislation systematically, um,
in the direction of managing
and reducing natural hazard risk.
Integration of the emergency management reforms
through the bill with these other legislative packages, uh,
can ensure clarity before and after events
and signal to individuals, businesses,
and communities how New Zealand intends
to manage natural hazard risk in the future.
From an insurance perspective, we know from engaging
with our members and reinsurers overseas
that these signals matter to the global insurance capital
market, demonstrating that we're growing
and developing sustainably
and sensibly managing natural hazard risks supports new
Zealand's access to reinsurance, a key driver
of insurance accessibility.
And finally taking a broader view of all policy decisions,
building or at least supporting resilience
and natural hazards should be considered across all
government policies.
Even those with objectives not
directly aimed at managing risks.
Insurers strongly support growth and development
and we suggest that, for example,
policy is aimed at enabling growth
and future development should adopt a do no
harm approach to resilience.
Avoiding one step forward and two steps back.
Ultimately through growth that takes natural hazard risk
into account and proactively manages that risk.
We protect communities
and the insurance market remains accessible
and sustainable for the long term.
In summary, the insurance
and emergency management sectors are aligned
and we believe that working together will improve
future recovery outcomes.
At the same time as we prepare for future events,
we encourage the government to systematically manage those
natural hazard risks to reduce the impact of those events.
Um, thanks for the time today.
I'm happy to to leave my remaining time
for any questions you may have on our submission.
Thank you very much, Sean. That was excellent.
Um, I'll just look around the other members.
Looks like Andy Foster is up first. Uh,
Look, thank you very much Sean for that.
Just, um, we've had quite a number of submissions.
It's something I'm very, um, uh,
very interested in the whole relationship with planning, uh,
between emergency management planning so that we try
and minimize risk right up front.
The reduction part, um, the,
you've got a suggestion in your submission about
particularly around data and information sharing.
What do you see the role of, um,
of the insurance sector being in the planning process in
basically cutting off, um, development in in places,
which we will put it at high risk.
Um, and also you've also
talked about sharing of information.
I've got a, a bill actually around specifically sharing
of information for customers, um, or prospective customers.
So I'm just interested in the transparency of that, um,
and to who that transparency is, uh, is being suggested.
So two parts of the question.
Yeah, I I think, um, when it comes to information sharing,
there, there are two sides of it when we talk about it, um,
from an insurance industry angle, um,
our submission deal specifically with information post-event
and sharing information from the emergency management sector
to insurers post-event to enable them to plan
and resource and scale.
Um, it sounds like your question deals more with that kind
of planning and future risk. It
It's be it's before event
so we don't have the event in the first place. Yes.
Yeah, exactly. And while we would be supportive of that,
I think largely this sector wants
to participate in those planning conversations.
Um, it can be a difficult question to answer
because often at the end of the day, the, um,
the insurance industry answer is that any consideration
for an offering of insurance is on a case by case basis.
Um, and so it's hard to answer broad questions about,
for example, will this subdivision be insurable?
Um, there are a lot of questions that need to happen
underneath that, um, to, to determine how it will be built
to what standard, um, finish floor heights,
what mitigation is in place if it is a
community that would be exposed.
Um, so that is a difficult question to answer.
However, saying that, um, some of my colleagues at ICNZ
and other people in the industry have been working with, um,
MFE through some of the RMA reforms
and have engaged quite deeply on these questions.
I think ultimately, um, if I had to answer right now, today,
the sector wants to be involved in those conversations,
at least to give some qualitative advice on
how insurers view some of those risks, um,
to hopefully inform some of those planning decisions.
Would that in insureability question in mind,
But so at least while you would say you'd, you'd need
to have more information, do things on a case by case basis
for individual properties, you would presumably
as an industry be able to look at a particular,
a wider environment and say, look, that's,
that's an environment which gives us cause
for concern or it doesn't.
Um, yeah, I think a, again,
in a qualitative sense it would be easy
to say there's a location
or a, a wider area where there's a cause
for concern from an insurance perspective,
but in many cases it's important to remember that there,
there can be measures put in place to mitigate the risk that
An area, I understand that at least it triggers those,
at least it triggers those measures rather than
them ignoring them.
Sure. Yep. Okay. No, that's helpful. Thank you.
Thank you. And uh, thank you Sean
for your time on behalf of the council today.
We, we appreciate it
and the thorough written submission as well.
Um, members, I'm sure we'll be, uh, keen
to hear from Disability Connect when we return.
They are not scheduled to join us now until three o'clock,
so we'll take a slight break 'cause it's been a long day.
Can I just briefly say to the committee,
and you can be off the live stream if you want, but.